JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first, say
New Hampshire,
and most people in the political
world think
first-in-the-nation primary,
coming up February
9.
But, these days, there's
another, more disturbing
distinction for the Granite
State, the expectation
that last year's fatal drug
overdoses will
hit a record 400 deaths.
Today, presidential candidates
and state political
leaders gathered for a forum to
tackle addiction
and the growing heroin crisis.
I traveled to New Hampshire last
month to
get a firsthand look at the
epidemic and its
repercussions.
Like the rest of the country,
New Hampshire
has long grappled with its share
of drug abuse.
But, in the past few years, the
easy availability
of cheap heroin and fentanyl,
another opiate,
has exploded into a crisis that
leaders in
both parties say needs urgent
attention.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN (D), New
Hampshire: The
opioid epidemic is really our
most pressing
public health and public safety
issue right
now.
DONNA SYTEK (R), Former New
Hampshire House
Speaker: Drug abuse has always
been a challenge
for New Hampshire, but, with the
opioid crisis,
it has reached epic proportions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats like
Governor Maggie
Hassan and Republicans like the
former Speaker
of the State Assembly Donna
Sytek agree the
state was slow to recognize what
was happening
in front of everyone's eyes.
But there's no mistaking it here
at HOPE for
New Hampshire, where the
holidays mean no
slowdown in people needing help
on their road
to recovery.
HOLLY CEKALA, Hope for New
Hampshire: Some
people are staying busy,
connecting with their
peers, staying in recovery.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The center
provides nonclinical
support for men and women coping
with an alcohol
or drug addiction that in many
cases started
with a painkiller prescribed by
a physician.
HOLLY CEKALA: You can be tall,
short, white,
black. You could speak English,
you could
not. You could be a CEO or you
could be a
homeless vet. And it really just
doesn't discriminate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Director of
recovery supports,
Holly Cekala, herself in
long-term recovery,
told us the center was created
in response
to a growing need in New
Hampshire's largest
city, Manchester.
HOLLY CEKALA: Even if I opened
up six more
treatment centers here, you're
still going
to fill them. And you're still
going to have
a rotation, unless we protect
our investment
in treatment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The statistics
are staggering.
In 2013, New Hampshire saw 192
drug overdose
deaths. That number shot up to
326 in 2014.
As of mid-December, 342 people
died this past
year. And the fatalities are
just the tip
of the iceberg.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE,
Executive Director,
New Futures: We have a
population in New Hampshire
of about 1.3 million people. And
approximately
100,000 folks are in need of
substance use
treatment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Linda Saunders
Paquette is
the executive director of New
Futures, a group
that advocates for drug and
alcohol abuse
prevention and reduction.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE: With
those high rates
of people with substance use
disorder, we
are also second to last in the
country when
it comes to somebody in need of
treatment
being able to access
Access is an issue state
Representative Gladys
Johnsen saw firsthand almost a
decade ago.
GLADYS JOHNSEN (D), New
Hampshire State Representative:
It's really a disease. And I had
not owned
that until I witnessed it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Years before she
became a state
legislator, the father of
Johnsen's grandson
fatally overdosed in their home.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: My daughter
Jorinda (ph) comes
running upstairs at 5:15. "I
can't wake Jesse
(ph). I can't wake Jesse."
And we, of course, rushed down
there. And
Jesse was gone. And we --
immediately, my
husband did the chest
compressions, and I
tried breathing in his mouth.
And I knew in
my heart he was gone. And so,
you know, it
has taken me a long time. And he
wasn't -- they
weren't married, but he was one
of mine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnsen says just
weeks before
Jesse's death, he had tried to
get help for
his addiction.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: It still hurts
my soul. I
watched him call place after
place after place
after place, saying: "I really
need help.
Can you find me a place?" And he
could not
find a place because he didn't
have any money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bryan Patriquin,
an intern
at HOPE for New Hampshire, told
us that although
he has gotten help throughout
his four years
of recovery, stories like
Jesse's are all
too common.
BRYAN PATRIQUIN, HOPE for New
Hampshire: If
we were to walk down the streets
of Manchester,
it would be a matter of time
before we saw
a drug deal happen. But if you
call a treatment
center right now, you're going
to get a waiting
list for four to six weeks, on
average.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The drug crisis
here is not
just happening behind closed
doors. Among
the cans and bottles littering
the state's
parks and little league fields,
authorities
have found lots of drug
paraphernalia, including
hundreds of needles.
Drug abuse is such a problem,
that Manchester's
mayor, Ted Gatsas, says he has
regular visits
from parents of young people
who've overdosed
on opioids like heroin and
fentanyl.
TED GATSAS (R), Mayor of
Manchester, New Hampshire:
We need to do something about
it. If we don't,
we're not going to have to worry
about building
more beds to try and treat
people. We're going
to have to start building more
coffins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Maggie
Hassan has
presented her own set of
proposals to combat
the opioid crisis. It seems
likely the legislature
will adopt at least some of
them.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN: The most
important thing
we know we need to do is
increase access to
treatment in New Hampshire, and
that really
boils down to making sure we
reauthorize our
Medicaid expansion program,
because, for the
first time, under Medicaid
expansion, the
Medicaid program covers
treatment and behavioral
health issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Realizing drug
abuse has become
an issue important to New
Hampshire, the presidential
hopefuls have also responded.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Look,
I have some personal experience
with this
just as a dad. It's the most
heartbreaking
thing in the world to have to go
through.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
My friend, they found him dead
in a motel
room by himself with an empty
bottle of Percocet
and an empty quart of vodka. He
was 52 years
old. My friend had every success
in the world,
as we define it, and then,
because of his
addiction, he had nothing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: State
Representative Johnsen
raised the drug crisis at a
Clinton campaign
event.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: We are
grandparents raising
our 10-year-old grandson,
because his father,
we lost him to an overdose.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I have to say, Gladys,
that you're the
third grandmother that I have
personally met
in New Hampshire in the last
several months
who is raising a grandchild
because of drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donna Sytek, who
recently endorsed
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie, says the
debate now lies in how to solve
the problem.
DONNA SYTEK: When budgets get
tight, that's
one area where there are
cutbacks. And so
it has been a problem. There
hasn't been a
lot of money. It's not
surprising that New
Hampshire doesn't spend a lot on
that. We
don't spend a lot on a lot of
other programs,
because we believe in small
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is, after
all, the state
with the motto "Live Free or
Die."
Even so, Republican Mayor Gatsas
is in favor
of spending more on law
enforcement to tackle
the crisis.
TED GATSAS: We need to start
from the top,
and preventing folks from
getting addicted
by preventing the cross-line of
heroin coming
across into this state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Hassan,
who is backing
Hillary Clinton for president,
argues the
state investment in treatment is
not only
the right thing to do for
addicts, but also
in the best interest of the
business community.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN: This has got
a huge economic
impact. We have a 3.2 percent
unemployment
rate in New Hampshire. It's one
of the lowest
in the country. If we can't find
a work force
that isn't struggling with an
addiction problem,
that has a direct economic
impact on us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Advocates say
that understanding
addiction and eliminating its
stigma should
go hand in hand with treatment.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE: In the
past, a person
who had an addiction was thought
to have a
moral failing. But thanks to
science, we now
know that addiction is a chronic
relapsing
brain disease.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
exactly what HOPE
for New Hampshire stresses to
politicians
and to those struggling with
addiction.
BRYAN PATRIQUIN: At 21
years-old, I was well
over 500 pounds. I was unhealthy
and a daily
substance user. I found this
group of people
who I still -- still see today
-- I'm sorry
-- it's like really kind of an
emotional thing.
It's an emotional thing for me.
And they stuck
behind me and they supported me.
HOLLY CEKALA: I believe that if
I had a place
like this to come to when I was
struggling
with my addiction, it would have
taken me
much less time to put my life
back together.
That's why I do what I do.